TITLE: Collapse of a historic oyster fishery: diagnosing causes and identifying paths toward increased resilience.
AUTHOR: Camp, E. V., W. E. Pine III, K. Havens, A. S. Kane, C. J. Walters, T. Irani, A. B. Lindsey, and J. G. Morris.
YEAR: 2015

Estuaries exist at the interface of ocean and fresh water and these
productive and biologically diverse ecosystems provide critical
services to coastal human communities throughout the world
(Grabowski and Peterson 2007, Barbier et al. 2011). Among
aquatic ecosystems, estuaries are particularly sensitive to change
because relatively small alterations in salinity can affect rates of
predation, disease, and physiology of the estuarine biota, which
are adapted to intermediate levels of salinity (Visser et al. 2002,
Buzan et al. 2009, Petes et al. 2012). Maintenance of estuary
ecosystem services depends on the resilience of the social-
ecological system: how natural resources, their users, and the
governance systems respond to (often unexpected) change
(Berkes and Folke 1998, Olsson et al. 2004, Gunderson 2010). In
a future of elevated biosphere temperature, associated changes in
evapotranspiration or precipitation patterns will likely reduce
water input to estuaries at the same time that sea level is rising,
allowing greater incursion of salt water from the ocean (Graeff
et al. 2013, Ingram 2013). These effects may be exacerbated in
areas where droughts are common, when low riverine flow reduces
nutrient and fresh water inputs into estuaries (Elsdon et al. 2009).
These changes may particularly impact sessile biota such as the
eastern oyster (Crassostrea virginica; hereafter “oyster”), which
becomes more prone to disease (Petes et al. 2012), and impacts
of marine predators (Oczkowski et al. 2011, Rindone and
Eggleston 2011) under increased salinity conditions.

An area potentially sensitive to such climate-change-driven
alterations is Apalachicola Bay, in the Gulf of Mexico in the
southeastern USA. This estuary is fed by a large river system (the
Apalachicola-Chattahoochee-Flint, or ACF basin) that spans the
boundaries of three states, Georgia, Alabama, and Florida (Fig.
1). The river and its series of man-made dams and reservoirs
provide flood protection; provide water supply to urban,
residential, and agricultural users; and are the primary fresh water
input to the Apalachicola estuary at the river’s mouth.
Apalachicola Bay supports an economically important oyster
fishery known for its high quality product that historically has
accounted for 90% of oysters sold in Florida and over 10% of
oysters sold in the continental USA (USACE 1998). The
Apalachicola River has a history of drought and flood, and the
bay has a contemporaneous history of wax and wane of its oyster
population (Wilber 1992, Livingston et al. 1997, Livingston 2015,
Pine et al. 2015). Apalachicola Bay oysters and the oyster fishery
have also experienced negative impacts from tropical storms that
may alter habitat (Berrigan 1988), increased predator abundance
and disease occurrence during drought (Menzel et al. 1966, Petes
et al. 2012), and fluctuations in market demand. All of these
factors can and have led to temporally variable oyster abundance
and harvests (Pine et al. 2015).
The years 2004-2013 were a period of significant societal and
ecological stress in the Apalachicola Bay region. This stress was

not only due to the Apalachicola Bay fishing community’s
dependence on the availability of a highly variable natural
resource (oysters for fishery harvest), but also to multiple extreme
regional environmental stressors. Wind, storm surge, and coastal
flooding from hurricane Dennis (2005) and tropical storms Fay
(2008) and Debby (2012) impacted the region. In April 2010
following the blowout of the Macondo oil well and the sinking
of the Deepwater Horizon drill platform, the largest marine oil
spill on record occurred in the northern Gulf of Mexico. This
event had impacts on Apalachicola Bay oyster resources and the
Apalachicola community (Grattan et al. 2011). Apalachicola Bay
oyster fisheries were not closed to harvest during the oil spill,
unlike large oyster harvesting areas in coastal Texas, Louisiana,
and Alabama, because oil did not reach the Apalachicola Bay
region. This initially led to increases in oyster prices and harvests
to make up for shortages of oyster product in the supply chain.
Harvests also increased (Pine et al. 2015) possibly because of local
concerns that livelihoods could be restricted by fishery closures
that might occur related to the oil spill (as reported by local
fishermen). By summer 2011, consumer fears about seafood
safety from the Gulf of Mexico related to the oil spill led to large

declines in seafood demand and ultimately resulted in layoffs in
the regional oyster and other commercial fisheries industry,
though not a cessation of oyster harvest in Apalachicola Bay
(McCrea-Strub et al. 2011, Sumaila et al. 2012). These oil spill-
related events led to significant stress levels in the people living in
the Apalachicola Bay area that were similar to those experienced
in communities directly impacted by the oil spill (Grattan et al.
2011).
At the same time, from 2010 throughout most of 2012, drought
conditions across the ACF basin led to extremely low
Apalachicola River discharge, among lowest on record (S.
Leitman, W. E Pine III, and G. Kiker, unpublished manuscript),
and increased salinity levels in Apalachicola Bay (Havens et al.
2013). Oyster harvests and oyster fishing effort (number of trips)
from Apalachicola Bay were above recent averages during this
same time (Pine et al. 2015). In fall 2012, there was a sudden
collapse in the Apalachicola Bay oyster fishery as harvestable
oyster populations appeared to be very low. This led to reportedly
significant underemployment of fishery workers and a request
from the State of Florida to the National Oceanographic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) for a fisheries disaster
declaration to allow the use of federal funds to support the
industry and community during a time of disaster (Havens et al.
2013). This request was granted in 2013 (USDC 2013).
The collapse of the oyster fishery has had a profound effect on
the Apalachicola Bay human community that largely depends on
this fishery. Simultaneously, this community’s response to the
oyster population decline will likely play a prominent role in the
potential recovery of the oyster population and the economic
recovery of the fishery-dependent components of the community.
The critical role that human communities can play in ecosystem
outcomes, in this case oyster population recovery, has been well
recognized (Holling 1978, Berkes and Folke 1998, Chapin et al.
2009). Increasingly research has focused on understanding the
effects of community or stakeholder identification, analysis, and
participation in the actual management process (Ostrom 1990,
2009 Mikalsen and Jentoft 2001). The result is a broad and
growing acknowledgment that community engagement, e.g.,
stakeholder participation in citizen science and co management,
is crucial to developing more effective adaptive governance
systems characterized by ecosystem resilience (Holling and
Meffee 1996, Folke et al. 2005, Ostrom 2009).
At the request of the county governments in the Apalachicola
region, a team of researchers from the University of Florida met
in 2012 with the oyster fishing industry, the Apalachicola
community, and regulatory agencies to do the following: (1)
identify the proximal cause of the oyster fishery collapse and (2)
explore options for managing and restoring the resource to make
it more resilient to future droughts and other changes. This paper
describes the natural and social science aspects of the project, the
major challenges faced, assessment outcomes, and management
recommendations that were developed. This case study is relevant
to other estuaries because it explores implementing powerful but
flexible approaches to management for both natural resources
and resource users (people) in a changing world, where the
traditional approach of assuming and planning in the context of
system stationarity is no longer applicable (Milly et al. 2008,
Hallegatte 2009).
