TITLE: The Open Language Archives Community: An Infrastructure for Distributed Archiving of Language Resources 
AUTHOR: Gary Simons, Steven Bird
YEAR: 2003

A current trend in literary and linguistic computing is the explosion of digital resources. These resources include not only data (i.e. electronic editions of primary sources and secondary analyses or descriptions), but also the software tools used to create and view electronic data and the how-to documents that give advice about making best use of the data and tools. It is clear that these new electronic media in conjunction with distribution via the World-Wide Web offer a degree of access to resources that is unparalleled in history.  But there is a gap between what users need and what they can achieve today. For instance, even though the electronic resource that a potential user needs may exist, it may not be indexed by search engines. Even if a needed resource has been indexed by a search engine, it will remain inaccessible if the user’s search terms do not match the terms by which it was indexed. And even when the user accesses a data resource of relevance, it may remain unusable for want of the tools needed to view and manipulate it or appropriate advice on how to use them. These are all problems of resource discovery. Another major problem area is that of resource creation. The proliferation of formats and approaches that have been used by different data providers confounds the average researcher who would like to prepare materials for publication on the web. With the proliferation of approaches, the development of tools for resource creation has been diffused in many directions, with the result that no single approach offers a complete easy-to-use tool set. Most disturbing of all is the fact that the ephemeral nature of the competing approaches (due to the short lifespan of the hardware and software they are based on) is putting these new resources at risk. Unless steps are taken to ensure the longevity of electronic information resources, many of today’s resources will be virtually unusable within ten years (Bird and Simons, 2002). The promise of unparalleled access could instead become a reality of unparalleled confusion. A new direction for humanities computing would be for the community to organize its efforts so as to bridge this gap between present reality and the needs of the community. This paper describes what one subcommunity, namely, those working with language-related resources, is doing in pursuit of this goal. The Open Language Archives Community (OLAC) was founded in December 2000 when a group of nearly 100 linguists, archivists, and software developers gathered in a workshop on web-based language documentation and description. After reaching consensus on the requirements for language-resource archiving (Simons and Bird, 2000a) and on a vision for how acting in community could serve to bridge the gap between the present reality and the envisioned future (Simons and Bird, 2000b), OLAC was launched with the following purpose statement: OLAC, the Open Language Archives Community, is an international partnership of institutions and individuals who are creating a worldwide virtual library of language resources by: (1) developing consensus on best current practice for the digital archiving of language resources, and (2) developing a network of interoperating repositories and services for housing and accessing such resources. This community involves both people and machines in cooperation. This paper describes the infrastructure that has been developed in order to support the needed cooperation. Section 2 describes the technical infrastructure that defines how participating machines interact with other participating machines. Section 3 describes the usage infrastructure that defines how participating people interact with participating machines. Finally, Section 4 describes the governance infrastructure that defines how participating people interact with each other.