TITLE: A matrix approach to the statistics of longevity in heterogeneous frailty models
AUTHOR: Hal Caswell Source: Demographic Research
YEAR: 2014

The gamma-Gompertz (hereafter, G-G) model is one of a class of models that investigate the effects of hidden heterogeneity — heterogeneity that is either unobservable or unobserved — on mortality rates. It calculates various consequences of that heterogeneity for the dynamics of cohorts (e.g. Vaupel, Manton, and Stallard 1979; Vaupel and Yashin 1985; Yashin, Iachine, and Begun 2000; Vaupel 2010; Wienke 2010; Missov 2013). I refer to this heterogeneity as frailty, making no assumptions about its causes. The goal of this paper is to present a matrix formulation that permits easy computation of all the properties of the G-G and other frailty models. Frailty models can be characterized by their components: 1. the baseline mortality rate, 2. the effects of frailty on the baseline mortality rate, 3. the dynamics of individual frailty over time, and 4. the initial distribution of frailty. The baseline mortality rate in the G-G model is the Gompertz model, in which mortality increases exponentially with age t, Frailty affects mortality as a proportional hazard. If Z (a non-negative random variable) denotes frailty, and z its realization, then the mortality of an individual with frailty z at age t is where 0(t) is the baseline mortality schedule. The frailty z is a fixed property of the individual, and the initial distribution of frailty is a gamma distribution. Many other frailty models can be created by changing one or more of these four components. As we will see, the matrix formulation applies directly to all of them. Other pleasing properties of the matrix formulation will be discussed in Section 7. The dynamics at any age of a heterogeneous cohort depend on the distribution of frailty within the cohort. The dynamics differ from the dynamics of any frailty class because the distribution of frailty changes as the cohort ages (Vaupel and Yashin 1985). The more frail individuals tend to die sooner, and the cohort is progressively dominated by individuals of lower frailty. TosummarizesomewellknownfactsabouttheG-Gmodel(Wienke2010;Vaupeland Missov forthcoming), because frailty is unobserved, observations on the cohort reveal not the individual mortality schedules, but rather the marginal mortality rate where (z t) is the distribution of frailty at age t. The survivorship function of an individual of frailty z is and the marginal survivorship function of the cohort is The distribution of frailty at age t is obtained by multiplying the initial probability density for frailty z by the probability that an individual with fraility z survives to age t, and then scaling the result by dividing by the integral: The G-G model assumes that frailty is a fixed individual property and that the cohort begins life with frailty distributed according to a gamma distribution, z gamma(k ) with shape parameter k and scale parameter2 . The mean and variance of z are E(z) = k and V(z) = k 2. Thus, when E(z) = 1, the distribution is given by gamma 1 2 1 2 . The marginal mortality rate (3) for the G-G model is a sigmoid function of age, (Yashin, Vaupel, and Iachine 1994), converging to an asymptote at b 2 as t gets large. Thus, the G-G model is an attractive explanation for the widely observed pattern of decelerating increase in mortality with age, in both humans and other species (e.g., Vaupel et al. 1998; Horiuchi 2003; Vaupel 2010; Missov and Finkelstein 2011). Although it is simple to state, and widely used, deriving the consequences of the G-G model is mathematically challenging. Only recently has Missov (2013) obtained an expression for life expectancy at birth, by integrating the survivorship function (5). The result, a function of the Gompertz parameters a and b and the gamma distribution parameters k and , is where the function 2F1() is the Gaussian hypergeometric function.3 Life expectancy, however, is only one of many demographic properties implied by a mortality model. My goal here is to present a matrix formulation that provides not only the mean, but all the moments of longevity, various measures of life disparity, and the full dynamics of the joint distribution of age and frailty. It will become apparent from the construction of this model that it applies equally to a much broader class of frailty models, and I will present examples. The organization of this paper is as follows. Section 2 derives the matrix model, using methods developed for populations in which individuals are jointly classified by age and stage. Section 3 derives the fundamental matrix, the moments of longevity, the distribution of age at death, and other indices from the matrix model including (Section 3.4) the dynamics of the frailty distribution over the life of the cohort. Section 4 analyzes an example, using parameter estimates for Swedish females taken from Missov (2013). Section 5 discusses some interesting generalizations, with examples. Section 6 uses the model to partition variance in longevity into components due to individual stochasticity and heterogeneous frailty. Section 7 concludes by presenting a protocol for computation and discusses further extensions.