TITLE: Collaborative Music, Health, and Wellbeing Research Globally: Some Perspectives on Challenges Faced and How to Engage with Them
AUTHOR: Muriel E. Swijghuisen Reigersberg
YEAR: 2017

By way of introduction, it might be useful to clarify what I currently perceive to be music’s relationship to health and wellbeing. Firstly, based on current medically-derived, Western research evidence, I am not convinced music is capable of physically curing ill-health or disease. I do believe, however, that music can lighten the load of the suffering, calm those in pain and in distress, communicate information and concepts of health and wellbeing, and promote these ideas in culturally appropriate ways to those listening to or performing or generally experiencing music. Secondly, I fully understand that definitions
of what music is vary globally. In Africa or Indigenous Australia,
for example, the term may include the Western concept of dancing. I
also know that what “being in good health” means will vary across and
within different cultural groups.
Thirdly, over the past five to seven years, interest in studying
the relationship between music, health, and wellbeing has suddenly
increased significantly. I suggest this new interest has been fueled by,
among other things, the realization that it is not possible to answer all
there is to know about the relationship between music, health, and
wellbeing using either biomedical or social science approaches alone;
the economic downturn which has necessitated the need for cost-effective
approaches to improving wellbeing; a further decrease in the
availability of funding for “blue skies” (ethno)musicological research;
and an increased strategic emphasis on interdisciplinarity and collaborative
research across (inter)national funding bodies. This new
research interest has surfaced gradually and globally and, as such, I
term it a “movement.” This movement is certainly not a unified one,
and I do not advocate for it to be, as will become clear. This may contradict
the views of those working in, for example, Western clinical
music therapy, where evidence-based, medically-informed approaches
that need to conform to the gold standard have led to a desire to systemize
music therapy research and practice in order to encourage its
broad application and the generalizability of research findings. Tony
Wigram and Christian Gold (2012) refer to this as “the religion of evidence
based practice,” which they argue has both pros and cons. The
reasons I do not advocate striving to achieve uniformity are based on
my own fieldwork background and training, described below.
I shall base this article on applied ethnomusicological research
undertaken in the past two years, which has involved speaking to
colleagues from other disciplines such as (neuro) music psychology,
music therapy, and the sociology of music. My geographical areas of
engagement have been the United Kingdom, Austria, Finland, the
United States, and Australia. I have discovered that researchers and
practitioners in all the disciplines named have similar questions, but
that there are still a few challenges that ethnomusicologists need to
engage with constructively before increased interdisciplinary collaboration
on a more global scale can occur.
I believe increased collaboration among a variety of disciplines
is necessary for ethical reasons if we are to employ music to improve
wellbeing and, indirectly, health. Through increasing cross-cultural
comparisons and interdisciplinary inquiries, we will be able to refine
the data we have available on how music can improve wellbeing.
Such data should show which aspects of wellbeing are determined by
human physiological make-up and psychology and which responses
are related to in- and enculturation and lived musical experiences.
Much good work is already taking place in pockets of research and
practice, but these pockets have not yet become the norm and their
knowledge base is not yet embedded or taken for granted in what
Bruno Latour and Steve Woolgar label “type five” statements: facts no
longer disputed, and understood to be “common knowledge” among
specialists (1986, 76). Therefore, I will not focus on the commonalities
between disciplines and practitioners, not least because these
too vary from country to country and project to project on the micro
level. Instead, I will restrict myself to discussing the issues at a more
global, meta level, exploring the challenges I have identified thus far.
Nor will I enter into a general discussion on what interdisciplinarity
is and how it differs from cross-, multi-, and intradisciplinarity. Such
discussions have already taken place elsewhere, for example, in the
Oxford Handbook of Interdisciplinarity (Frodeman et al. 2010) and in the
work of Joe Moran (2010). Instead, I ask that readers think of what I
describe as collaborative research into the relationship between music,
health, and wellbeing and what challenges we need to overcome in
order to facilitate more frequent collaborations internationally.
These challenges include: (a) The perceived domains of inquiry of
ethnomusicology by other disciplines: Understandings of what ethnomusicologists
do and what ethnomusicology is tend to vary considerably. (b) Lack of collaboration: There is as yet little cross-fertilization
where scholars attend each other’s conferences, publish in each other’s journals, and train in different disciplines. I argue for a change
in educational models in music, health, and wellbeing, and for ethnomusicologists
to engage in continued professional development
themselves. (c) Discipline specific terminologies: The ways in which
researchers describe their work through language and research cultures
vary, not just between disciplines, but also between countries
and even institutions. I argue that through reflexively examining
these practices and differences, we will be better able to foster fruitful
collaborations on a more global scale.