TITLE: Music as Education, Voice, Memory, and Healing: Community Views on the Roles of Music in Conflict Transformation in Northern Uganda
AUTHOR: Lindsay McClain Opiyo
YEAR: 2015

“Peace returns, northern Uganda. Peace returns, our prayer,” sang Acholi artist Bosmic Otim in his popular song about the 2006 to 2008 peace talks aimed at ending the longstanding conflict between the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) and the government of Uganda.1 Local radio stations played “Peace Returns” extensively across northern Uganda’s airwaves, during a period in which the hundreds of thousands of people displaced by the violence waited anxiously to see if the tentative peace would hold. Community members regularly mention the song and credit it as giving hope to those caught in the middle of the violence.
Like dozens of other northern Ugandan artists at the time, Otim used his music to promote and create peaceful change.
Among the Acholi of northern Uganda, the performing arts, especially music, resonate in the public sphere more than any other expressive form and are therefore a natural avenue for further exploration (McClain 2010; Opiyo and Hepner 2013). Historically and regionally known for its linkage to cultural performances, recent Acholi music has centered on the lived realities of a people who have experienced more than two decades of armed conflict. Today, nearly ten years since the guns have fallen silent and northern Uganda has experienced relative peace and stability, the Acholi people widely credit music with playing a central role in positively transforming the conflict. Moreover, they continue to call for local artists to influence the ongoing transition. Although the primary rebel faction, the LRA, still operates in neighboring countries, leading many community members to question whether the peace will hold, communities, civil society, and government officials regularly debate the best avenues for rebuilding northern Uganda’s torn social and economic fabrics and facilitating accountability and reconciliation for those involved (Carrington and Naughton 2012; Tenove and Radziejowska 2013). For popular opinion on these issues of peacebuilding, the arts provide one meaningful avenue.
Drawing upon a conflict transformation (CT) framework—as well as more than two hundred conflict-related songs, and primary source
interviews and focus group discussions with forty-six Acholi community members and artists—this article explores how communities experience and perceive music as playing a role in creating peaceful change in northern Uganda. Listening to community members’ perceptions on the role of music provides deeply rooted, context-specific insights into how communities experience and respond to the circumstances around them. Furthermore, by listening to community members’ experiences and interactions with music, one can better assess how music may have contributed to transformation in the setting. In doing so, this article is divided into three sections. First is the conceptual and methodological overview of music and CT. Second is a description of Acholi musical traditions, contemporary genres, and the recent conflict. The
third section explores how the community-identified roles of Acholi
music as education, voice, memory, and healing relate to CT theory.
The article concludes by proposing ways in which these insights can inform, and possibly improve, future peacebuilding strategies involving music.