TITLE: ANALYSIS OF ROLLING GROUP THERAPY DATA USING CONDITIONALLY AUTOREGRESSIVE PRIORS
AUTHOR: Susan M. Paddock, Sarah B. Hunter, Katherine E. Watkins and Daniel F. McCaffrey
YEAR: 2011

Group therapy. Group therapy is a central treatment modality for behavioral health disorders, such as alcohol and other drug use (AOD) disorders [Kadden et al. (2001); Kadden and Litt (2004); Monti et al. (2002); Crits-Christoph et al. (1999); Wells et al. (1994)] and depression [Thompson et al. (1983); Neimeyer et al. (1989); Robinson, Berman and Neimeyer(1990); Bright, Baker and Neimeyer (1999)]. Most community-based behavioral health treatment is provided in groups. Its therapeutic strengths include group members having opportunities to develop and practice new social skills and behaviors, receiving feedback from other group members, learning from the shared experiences of other group members, and providing a recovery network to clients [Neimeyer et al. (1989); Satterfield (1994)]. Group therapy is especially relevant for treatment providers in light of rising costs, as group therapy has clear economic advantages over individual therapy [Jacobs and Goodman (1989); Bright, Baker and Neimeyer (1999); Monti et al. (2002)]. These advantages are evident in our motivating study, Building Recovery by Improving Goals, Habits and Thoughts (BRIGHT). In BRIGHT, AOD treatment clients with depressive symptoms received group cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) that was delivered by AOD treatment counselors, rather than psychotherapists. The analytic question we consider in this paper is whether the depressive symptoms of AOD clients decreased while attending group CBT over an 8-week period.
Group therapy with rolling admissions. A feature of the group CBT offered in BRIGHT that is shared by many therapy groups offered in other AOD treatment settings is that clients enter group under a rolling (or open) admissions policy. This means that clients are continuously enrolled in group as space permits. Figure 1 illustrates a hypothetical rolling admission pol-
icy for two therapy groups (labeled “GROUP 1” and “GROUP 2”), each of which has four sessions. It is important to note the difference between groups and sessions. The two groups in Figure 1 each have four sessions. The sessions in Group 1 are independent of sessions in Group 2 because there is no overlap in the sets of clients who attend the sessions in Group 1 versus Group 2—for example, in Figure 1, clients A–H attend Group 1 and clients J–W attend Group 2. In contrast, the sessions within each group are not
independent since clients may attend multiple sessions within each group. For example, clients B, C, D attend all four sessions offered in Group 1. The “rolling” admissions policy is depicted in Figure 1, with new members indicated by boldface font in the first session they attend. While new members join the group, other members leave (e.g., client A left Group 1 after session 1 and was replaced by client F in session 2). This structure induces a complex pattern of interrelatedness among clients. Even though clients A and F in Group 1 never attend the same session, their data could be correlated. One example of this would be if client A were a disruptive client [Center for Substance Abuse Treatment (2005)] who adversely influenced the overall group dynamic in session 1 of Group 1 in such a way that clients B through E would bring that negativity with them to session 2, thus affecting
client F’s group experience. Figure 2 illustrates the actual client attendance patterns for 17 clients who participated in one of the four rolling cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT)
groups in the BRIGHT study. This group included 36 sessions. Each client (labeled A through Q) was expected to complete 16 sessions, with 4 sessions coming from each of four modules (or session themes)—Thoughts, Activities, People, or Substance Abuse—as noted at the top of Figure 2. Modules were offered on a rotating basis, and clients were allowed to enter the group at the start of a new module (e.g., at session 5, 9, 13, 17, 21, 25, or 33). This
illustrates the flexibility of treatment delivery afforded by rolling groups in BRIGHT—for example, a client only needed to wait for a new module, rather than an entirely new but closed 16-session group, to start CBT. Thus, not only are client outcomes correlated within therapy sessions, but they are also correlated across therapy sessions within each therapy group. This is in contrast to the analytically much simpler scenario of “closed” enrollment groups, in which the same set of clients is expected to attend the same set of sessions with no change in membership, such that the correlation in the outcomes for clients in the same closed group could be modeled using a hierarchical model with random terms for each closed therapy group. Previous approaches to modeling data from rolling therapy groups. Despite the ubiquity of groups with rolling admissions in practice [Kadden et al. (2001); Kadden and Litt (2004); Monti et al. (2002); Rohsenow et al. (2001, 2004); Davis et al. (2005); Granholm et al. (2005); Center for Substance Abuse Treatment (2005)], very little attention has been devoted to developing appropriate statistical methods for such data. In a review article, the possibility was discussed of using standard hierarchical models that used
group as the clustering variable (e.g., Figure 1), but was dismissed because it ignores the complex attendance pattern within the group [Morgan-Lopez and Fals-Stewart (2006)]. Another possibility discussed therein was to break up the group into subgroups in some fashion and use a multiple membership model, but the independence assumption typically invoked for such models was criticized. Perhaps even more frequently, the approach taken in therapy group studies—with rolling or closed groups—is to ignore the group structure altogether [Lee and Thompson (2005); Roberts and Roberts (2005); Bauer, Sterba and Hallfors (2008)]. To date, the only analytic method specifically developed and applied to
data collected from clients as they attend rolling group sessions did not explicitly model the correlation among outcomes from clients within a group [Morgan-Lopez and Fals-Stewart (2007)]. Rather, the authors of that study fit models assuming no correlation but adjusted the standard errors to account for possible correlation among clients who attended the same group (not session) using a robust standard error (sandwich) estimator [Liang and Zeger (1986)]. The authors also addressed the potential problem of nonignorable missing data [e.g., Little (1995)] from clients who chose not to attend all sessions by using a pattern mixture model, where patterns depended on latent classes related to number of sessions attended and client characteristics. Morgan-Lopez and Fals-Stewart (2008) found that modeling different missing data (attendance) patterns helped with variance estimation, in that nominal Type 1 error rates were preserved. However, there are some important limitations to this approach. First, even when nonignorably missing data are a major problem, modeling missing data patterns does not account for the correlation structure depicted in Figures 1 and 2, leading to concerns that even pattern-mixture modeling without accounting for the intra- or inter-session correlation of client outcomes could lead to underestimated variances. Second, using the sandwich estimator is only appropriate in studies with large numbers of rolling groups. The sandwich estimator will only provide a consistent estimate of standard errors of parameter estimates, as the number of therapy groups grows arbitrarily large, and it can be biased when the number of groups is small [Liang and Zeger (1986); Bell and McCaffrey (2002)]. The number of rolling groups is small (as few as 1–4) in many rolling group studies [Kadden et al. (2001); Kadden and Litt (2004); Rohsenow et al. (2001, 2004)]; in the motivating BRIGHT study, there were just four rolling groups. Third, the sandwich estimator only adjusts the standard errors; it does not model the clustering of client outcomes both within and across sessions and does not provide information about the sources of variance. Finally, even in studies with large numbers of rolling groups, relying on the sandwich estimator to adjust for correlation at the group level would be inefficient relative to model-based approaches to directly model the correlation structure attributable to session attendance [Firth (1992)]. 1.4. Conditionally autoregressive priors. Given these limitations, we present a novel application of conditionally autoregressive (CAR) priors [Besag, York and Molli´e (1991)] for modeling session-level random effects to capture the interrelatedness of client outcomes. CAR priors offer promise for adeptly modeling correlations at the session level that are induced by session attendance patterns. Though a quick glance at Figures 1–2 might suggest that a potentially simpler time series approach might be appropriate, the CAR prior can accommodate alternative scenarios that frequently occur in practice, such as sessions offered at unequally spaced points in time, multiple independent sets of therapy group sessions or “islands” [Hodges, Carlin and Fan (2003)], and flexible definitions of closeness of sessions that cover a broad range of complex scenarios, such as accounting for number of clients shared by sessions or variable lengths of time between sessions. In this paper we describe the motivating BRIGHT study (Section 2) and present a hierarchical Bayesian CAR model for the BRIGHT data (Section 3). In Section 4 we examine the relative performance of the Bayesian CAR approach versus competing approaches for accounting for the interdependence of client outcomes. We compare these approaches using BRIGHT data to examine whether depressive symptoms decrease during the course of group therapy in Section 5. We conclude by discussing the implications of our method for therapy group data analysis in Section 6.