TITLE: Hashtag Healthcare: From Tweets to Mental Health Journals Using Deep Transfer Learning
AUTHOR: Benjamin Shickel, Martin Heesacker, Sherry Benton, and Parisa Rashidi
YEAR: 2017

Sentiment analysis, the task referring to the automatic determination of user opinion from text, has received increased attention in the past decade1–5. Much of the success of sentiment analysis techniques can be attributed to the rise of social media platforms, where millions of users share their opinions on a wide variety of subjects. The majority of sentiment analysis methods are aimed at aggregating opinions towards entities like movies, people, products, or companies. We refer to this well-known research area as external sentiment analysis, in which sentiment and textual polarity is calculated with respect to a specific external entity. In contrast, we define internal sentiment analysis as the study of the polarity of user text with respect to themselves, primarily concerned with statements of emotion and mental health. In this paper, we deal strictly with internal sentiment analysis, specifically with the valence prediction of private journals in a mental health therapy setting. Our work partly aligns with previous research regarding emotion detection in text7–12, a subtask of the field of affective computing and analysis, but unlike previous work, we focus on the expansion of valence categories in a mental health setting. One useful application domain of automated internal sentiment analysis frameworks is the burgeoning field of online mental health therapy services13–23. These programs provide the patient education components inherent in cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT). Practice identifying and changing unhelpful thought patterns or cognitive distortions is a central part of CBT. Ongoing practice with feedback can increase patients’ ability to accurately identify more helpful and less helpful thoughts, but up until now, ongoing feedback has been difficult to provide. As part of online treatment, users typically submit several directed journals for documenting their daily thoughts and feelings as they improve their mental well-being using self-directed strategies taught as part of therapy. An accurate and validated system for automatically categorizing user text has obvious benefits to such a therapy service, such as flagging text which may be an early warning for suicide risk, providing a positive and always-available feedback for patients with distorted thinking, or simply providing enhanced and more fine-grained analysis of overall patient well-being. Traditional sentiment analysis involves detecting whether a given text fragment is subjective or objective, and in the case of subjectivity, classifies the text as either positive or negative. While certainly the most straightforward design for external opinion mining, we take this analysis a step further for mental health polarity. Rather than framing the subjectivity identification task as a binary classification between positivity and negativity, we introduce two additional classes of polarity: both positive and negative, and neither positive nor negative. We made this decision based on psychological research, which suggests emotions cannot be represented on a single axis of valence24–28. Thus, text classified as neutral using traditional frameworks would, using our new annotation scheme, fall into either of the two augmented classes. Unfortunately, publicly-available mental health datasets suitable for machine learning-based internal sentiment analysis are few and far between. However, large amounts of social media text have become available in recent years, and several studies have examined traditional sentiment analysis in the context of social media platforms such as Twitter?, 29–34. Given social media users’ tendency towards self-expression, we hypothesize that the social media domain is quite similar to the mental health domain with regards to textual language modeling and classification, and can be used to help train mental health models and systems. We quantify the similarity between the two domains using a machine learning technique known as transfer learning. This approach involves training models on one domain (i.e. social media text) and fine-tuning them on another target domain (i.e. mental health text). We specifically focus on transfer learning in the context of deep learning, a subfield of machine learning that is designed to automatically learn ideal representations of raw data without human supervision or manual feature engineering. In recent years, deep learning techniques have yielded state-of-the-art performance in the computer vision and natural language processing (NLP) domains. Success in NLP applications is due largely in part to these nonlinear models’ ability to model language from raw characters or words. We train deep learning models on a large dataset of annotated text from the social media platform Twitter, and transfer the underlying language model and learned representation to the task of predicting the valence of mental health journal text. Additionally, we use the same Twitter-based model to predict objective change in mental health as gauged by evidence-based mental health measures. We demonstrate that language models built from social media can be successfully transferred to the mental health domain for improved performance for emotional valence prediction, and argue that social media is a valuable source of data for text-based mental health applications, a domain in which labeled data is notoriously scarce.